From Hansel minutes.com. It's Hanselman.
It's a weekly discussion with
web developer and technologists. Scott
Hanselman posted by Carl Franklin. This
is Lawrence Ryan announcing show number
48. Recorded Wednesday, January 17,
2007. Support for Hanselman it's
is provided by COVID Smith
tools. Makers of code Smith.
An extensive will tip the
base code generator for.net Hanselman.
His listeners get $100 off
COVID Smith professional with coupon
code H M 100. online@covidsmithtools.com.
Support is also provided by.net
developers journal the world's leading.net
developer magazine online at www
dot  dot com. In
this episode, Scott talks with
Chris Brooks and Eli Smith
about the trend in classic
board gaming. Hi, this is
Scott Hanselman. And on this
episode of Hansel minutes, we'll
be talking about board gaming,
classic board gaming for the
programmer. There's a lot of
HDTV out there. A lot
of PlayStation threes, a lot
of 10 ADP going on,
but still more and more
programmers are going to classic
board gaming. And with me,
I've got Chris Brooks, my
CTO here at Kirlian. Who's
also involved in a board
gaming company and I think
a hardcore board gamer and
then my friend, Eli Smith
and other hardcore board gamer.
Hi guys. Hi Scott always
got, so we just came
from a, this Friday, we
were sitting in the Karelian
break room, hanging out. We
had about eight, nine guys
there. A bunch of guys
brought and gals. A bunch
of people brought board games
from home is something we
do at Kirlian. Is it
it's every Friday, every Friday
at lunchtime. And I understand
it's pretty consistent. They said
that's unusual. Oftentimes that's the
first thing to drop off
is board gaming on the,
on the being on company
time at the lunch at
the lunch hour, but this
has been going on for
the better part of a
year. Isn't it. We've been
doing this for about a
year and a half, and
we have about 15 people
on our distribution list and
we'll get anywhere from five
to eight or nine on
a given day. Now we're
mostly programmers share. There's some
QA everyone's technical. Why are
people turning to board gaming
now? Is this a, is
this a Renaissance? Is this
a new 21st century thing
or people who've been doing
this for a long time?
Well, the Renaissance has really
been about what about six,
seven years now with the
advent of settlers of Catan
reaching American shore has really
brought a resurgence of board
game in America. And I
think that the programmers are
attracted to it because it's
a way to unplug and
get back to dealing with
people face to face. It
has the tactile sensation behind
a keyboard. And, and I
think that's what, what people
like about it. And is
it, is it all fundamentally
problem solving or programmers doing
this because it's a problem
solving thing. A here's the
rules that we work within.
Here's your goal work within
that, that structure? Yeah, I
think that has something to
do with it. And is
this something that is, you
said it reached American shores,
so there's a, there's a
game he's called it. Settlers
of Catan. Chris, would you
agree that that's when things
started? Yeah, I think the
modern board gaming trend started
about 10 years ago when
settlers of Catan was released
originally in Germany. And it
started a new genre of
games that are sometimes called
German games or Euro games
that was translated. English came
to the United States and started
a somewhat of a revolution
in board gaming within the
United States. No, I saw that
both of you sent me
links to a website that
had a list of your
games. And I see that
most real hardcore gamers go
to this particular site. They
have a list, Eli, you've
got 200 plus games. Chris,
you've got a whole gaming
room. I've, I've got about
400 games in my collection,
but I'm, I'm trying to
keep that flat. So I'm
trying to sell or give
away as many as I
buy in a given year.
So you remodeled a room
of your house explicitly for
the purposes of gaming. I've
seen the wall of games
Walls. Yes. Yes. I, we,
we turned our upstairs kind
of bonus room that we
have the computers in and
the kids do a lot
of computer gaming there as
well. We turn that into
our gaming room and it
has art decoration that has
board game covers and then
lots of shelf space for
my board game collection. And
you've got two kids and
Eli, you just had a
baby. It seems like programmers
are not only wanting to
do this, but they want
to share it with their
kids. And is it the
social aspect, the problem solving?
How does this affect like
your kids, Chris? It's a,
I think to Eli's point
earlier about being unplugged. I
think there is, if you
look at the generation of
kids today and even 20
somethings, they've grown up immersed
in technology. And I think
there's a desire on my
part as a parent to
want to make sure my
kids treasure the face to
face interaction that comes from
social activities, whether it's sports
or sitting down and playing
a family board game, like,
like we play Now Eli,
how would you say this
is different from the kind
of the Parker brothers stuff?
I mean, I'm not a
board gamer. I'm, I'm thinking
about getting involved, but from
my point of view, it's
like, can I really afford
yet another hobby? Am I
going to become a collector?
Is this going to suck
all my money? I can
take up, hang gliding. I
have to buy all the
hand gliding equipment. I assume
I have to buy board
gaming equipment. I do have
sorry and monopoly, but that
doesn't seem to be the
same kind of thing. It's
not the same board game.
How is this different than
Parker brothers? The differences is
basically How much your decisions
impact, how well you perform
in the game. I'm in
a lot of Parker, brothers
and more traditional American style
board games. Your choices are
very limited by how well
you roll dice or what
cards you draw in the
German games. You have a
lot more decisions to make,
and those directly impact how
well you perform in the
game. More like chess than
say, sorry, another thing I
want to add. That's all
too common in, in traditional
American games. And I would
include games like risk and
where it's not uncommon to
have player elimination where you
might have a game go
on for four hours. And
there's only two players left
for the last two hours
of that game. And I
don't think that's great for
a family setting. First, it
encourages beating up on each
other and wanting to be
the only guy left a
lot of the German games
and even newer American games
that we play have mechanics
built in to keep everybody
in the game until the
end and often a disguise
to some extent who might
be in the lead. So
there's a lot of tension
as you get to the
end of game of even
knowing who's going to win
the game. Yeah. That's a
really interesting point. I didn't
even think about that. I
mean, they're using the examples
that I just gave of,
sorry, and monopoly risk. You
all games where people get
pretty worked up. We took,
we played monopoly a couple
of weeks ago and you
know, some of the younger
kids got pretty intense as
they started to attain wealth.
They started to really dog
on the other kids. All
of those games involve elimination.
They drag on and it
does get kind of boring.
We just played a game
called 10 days in Africa.
And there was a lot
of tension. I realized that
I was like seconds from
winning. And then Chris came
from nowhere and won the
game. I thought that was,
that's a very interesting point.
Now, do you feel that
this helps you in your
programming job and your technical
job? Does it, is it,
is it a more of
a relaxation or does it
honestly give you a new
ways to think about and
solve problems? I do know
for a fact that people
that work in technology, particularly
programmers tend towards these sorts
of games. If you look
at the communities out there
that are on the internet
mailing lists, or even that
come to conventions for these
sorts of games, there's a
pretty significant overlap of technologists
and, and board gamers. So
I think there have to
be some traits in common.
I think your comments before,
around living within a rule
structure, trying to optimize your,
your choices that you make,
even the notion of design
patterns, which are common and
software find their way into,
into board games in terms
of mechanics that show up
in games. So I do
think there's a lot of
overlap and I think that
it it's just a tendency
based on characteristics of people.
Those that tend to be
more creative and don't like
rules as much. They might
tend more towards party games
that have a lot, even
more social interactions, games like
taboo or Pictionary, where there's
much more of a creative
element. Those sorts of games
actually are not as popular
in most cases in this
board gaming circle, huh? When
we were playing 10 days
in Africa, which was, I've
got a one game that
you gave me for Christmas
last year that we played
two on two it's a
card game, but this was
my first time in a
group and a large group.
We're four, four people I
think, played this game, a
larger group. And I was
getting confused with some of
the mechanics. And you said,
Oh, well this is just
a standard card swapping. You,
you hit some kind of
a LA carte swapping, continuous
building game, you know, it's,
it's very similar to, and
then you rattle off a
number of from games. Is
that the kind of pattern
that you're talking about? I
mean, the, the, the cards
changed the look and feel
change. I know that you
guys admire the packaging, but
there are only so many
ways that you could structure
a game, right? Yeah. That
we've discovered so far. And,
and Eli might want to
comment on this too, but
I think that most games
you find today assemble mechanics
and theme in different ways,
but it's fairly rare to
see a new mechanic. I'm
the one that actually comes
to mind that was the
most innovative in the last
20 years was actually the
magic, the gathering card game,
which I'm sure most people
have heard of. And that
was a craze in the,
in the mid nineties. And
it continues to be popular
today. That's probably, even though
it's not a board game,
that's probably the most innovative
thing that's happened within gaming
in the last 15 to
20 years. And people are
sitting around waiting for what's
the next big thing that's
going to hit around mechanics.
But yeah, true. Most of
the MCAT, most of the
games that I play tend
to have very similar mechanics,
but they're often assembled in
interesting ways, Two questions then
first is going to be,
how do you get started?
And we'll talk about that.
Cause I want to hear
your list. If, if I
was going to go out,
which I will after this
interview and buy three, four,
five games and try to,
you know, how do you
incorporate this into your life?
Is this just an after
dinner activity? Do you have,
do you guys get together
with groups on the weekends?
What's, what's a good way
to start in, in doing
this, the seat, do you
know, put your foot in
the water and see if
you like playing board games?
Well, if you have interested
friends or family members where
those are going to be
the easiest to approach another
good resource, if you're looking
for meeting more strangers or
playing with a different group
of people, then maybe the
people, you know, they're not
interested as there's lots of
local groups on Yahoo. There's
a group called PDX gamers.
You can join that group.
They have announcements of game
events going on around the
city. That would be Portland.
Since we have an international
crowd, do maybe Craigslist would
be a place to look
for gamers. Do you think?
Or, Well, board game geek
has a whole section devoted
to game groups in local
areas. So you can post
there's a, Hey, I'm looking
for a game group, they've
got it divided by state.
So whatever state you're in,
you can go to that
site post on that forum
and say, Hey, I'm looking
for a game group. It
just requires a free registration.
Yeah. I'm also going to
refer and these will show
up in the show notes,
but there are actually a
couple of podcasts that I'll
refer listeners to that actually
have kind of an episode
zero of their maybe a
hundred or more podcasts that
focus on what are called
gateway games. How do you
get into the hobby? What
are the best games to
get started and say, Hey,
is this something that really
is, is my thing or,
and they're games that you're
likely going to enjoy, but
if you don't like them
a lot, then maybe you
want to look for a
different hobby. I can mention
a few of those games
that will show up in
those podcasts. I think a
one that's come out recently,
that's become extremely popular as
a gateway game, as a
game called ticket to ride.
And this is a game
of building train connections in
America, settlers of Catan, which
we already mentioned is another
great choice and a carcass
on which is a game
about building castles and other
types of buildings. And France
is another very popular one.
And there's a board game
geek that Eli mentioned is
a great website to go
find other games that others
find pockets. Okay, Eli, what
are you, what are your
gateway games? I'm a little
bit more, since we've seen
this European resurgence, it's also
triggered an American resurgence with
publishers like fantasy flight and,
and a few others here
into the States and they
do it slightly different style
of game. And I like
a lot of their titles,
especially in those silver line,
which tends more towards those
European mechanics. I really make
a recommend a DragCon. I
think it's a great game,
especially for those in the
technical field. It's about building
loops and structures, which are
beneficial to you or detrimental
to your opponent. I love
robo rally. I think that's
a great game. It's about
programming robots with an instruction
set and then setting them
loose to cause chaos on
a factory floor. I really
recommend those games. And just
because you don't like some
of the recommended gateway games,
I say, don't abandon it
right away. You might just
not be playing a game
that suits your taste or
your style. Some people like
more confrontation. Some people like
less, and there's such a
wide variety out there. It's
really takes some finesse to
find those games that really
match your style and your
personality. And is this going
to be an expensive hobby
for me? It's expensive as
you want it to be.
Now, Chris, I understand that
you actually have, or either
have, or you're a partner
in a board gaming company.
Yes. I'm one of the
founders and owners of a
game company called sun river
games. It's very much a
moonlighting venture for me. And
about three of my friends
in the greater Portland area.
And it's mostly a vehicle
for us to publish games
that are actually designed by
people within the company. So
we published our first game
havoc, the a hundred years
war about a year and
a half ago. That was
the designed by Casey Humphrey.
And this year we published
a couple of games, one
called a 24 seven, which
is a great math game
for, for families and kids.
It's, it's very popular right
now that was published in
October and just hot on
the shelves is a game
called ink and gold, which
is our first published game
by another designer. It's actually
designed by Alan Moon and Bruno
fide duty. And Allen is
happens to be the designer
of the ticket to ride
game that I just mentioned.
And the 10 days in
Africa game that we played
earlier, and that game is
a, it's a great big
group game that has, it's
a pressure luck. I'm an
Indiana Jones type character going
down into a, some Incan
temples trying to get treasure.
And it's a great family
party game. Oh, that's cool.
That's amazing. It sounds like
it's a very tight knit
community. I mean, you're my
boss and you're my CTO
here at the company, but
it seems like quite a
coincidence that, that your games
are selling well, you're in
this deep into this kind
of group. How many people
are out there producing games?
I mean, you, you didn't
make up a game and
then draw some things on
cardboard. I mean, I've seen
these games, they're very professional.
It sounds like a great
deal of thought. And work
goes into this, that take
up a lot of time
and effort. It takes a
lot of time and effort
from the key creative people
in the company. I'm not
one of those. I'm more
just the business guy that
keeps the books and makes
decisions about maybe what we're
going to do and where
we're going to focus. Cause
frankly, I just don't, I
don't have the time I
have a day job. That's
actually pretty consuming itself. So
yeah, the, I I'm, I'm,
I'm blessed to have a
group of people that not
only design games, but are
very skilled in graphical layout.
We've done some of our
own artwork. We've used other
artists as well for ink
and gold. We actually used
a, an outside artist that
did all of the graphical
design and, and, and artwork
in it. It is, it's
a lot of work it's,
it is a, it's technically
a hobby, not a business
because I think you have
to make money doing it
for it to be called
a business, but we're having
a lot of fun and
it, it helps pay for
some conventions that we like
to go to and meet
other people. And it's, it's
a great way to get
some initial exposure for two
people that I think are
just great designers within the
company that could lead to
some bigger, bigger publishers picking
them up. And you've played
these games. Some of the
games you've mentioned Eli like
havoc. I played havoc and
I've played ink and gold
and they're good. I really
enjoy, I really enjoy having
it's. It's got kind of
a poker flavor to it
with a little bit, a
little bit of reclamation. I
really, really enjoyed that game.
So we've talked about gateway
game. We've talked about places.
People can go to learn
about gaming groups. I understand
Chris that when you go
traveling, you often will hook
up with whatever local group
is around town and play
games. Might this be something
that people who listen to
this podcast want to do?
Maybe if we're at tech
ed, find a room somewhere
in between sessions and bring
a couple of games and
put together a group it's
probably already happening. Yeah. I
know for a fact it
does happen at a lot
of technology conferences. If you
look at the message boards,
as people are preparing to
come down, you will often
see little groups getting together
to maybe play settlers. If
you're traveling, if you travel
a lot, I think board
game geek is a great
reference. There's a Yahoo group
as well. That's a mailing
list called spiel, freaks, spiel,
being the German word for
games and, and, and just
play. That's a great place
to post. I, Hey, I'm
going to be in Birmingham,
Alabama next week. Cause I
knew I want to get
together and play games. I
joke with my wife and
tell her that I have
an internet date next week
in some random city. And
she's a little little concerned
at times that I'm, I'm
sometimes meeting strangers, but these
are generally people that are
friends of friends that you
know, can be vouched for.
And they probably should feel
more nervous taking a stranger
into their home than I
should feel, but it's been
very fruitful. I've, I've managed
to make a lot of
friends and meet a lot
of interesting people doing that.
Well, this field, I feel
like I have enough information
now that I'm going to
go to the gaming place
after work and maybe pick
up a couple of ways,
gateway games and see how
it works for us. I
both of your guys' Time.
No problem. Thanks. .